### URL Helper ###

The URL Helper file contains functions that assist in working with URLs.

**Loading this Helper**

This helper is loaded using the following code:

	$this->load->helper('url');

The following functions are available:

**Available Functions**

	site_url([$uri = ''[, $protocol = NULL]])

**Parameters:**	

- $uri (string) – URI string
- $protocol (string) – Protocol, e.g. ‘http’ or ‘https’

**Returns:** Site URL

**Return type:** string

Returns your site URL, as specified in your config file. The index.php file (or whatever you have set as your site index_page in your config file) will be added to the URL, as will any URI segments you pass to the function, plus the `url_suffix` as set in your config file.

You are encouraged to use this function any time you need to generate a local URL so that your pages become more portable in the event your URL changes.

Segments can be optionally passed to the function as a string or an array. Here is a string example:

	echo site_url('news/local/123');

The above example would return something like: http://example.com/index.php/news/local/123

Here is an example of segments passed as an array:

	$segments = array('news', 'local', '123');

	echo site_url($segments);

This function is an alias for `CI_Config::site_url()`. For more info, please see the Config Library documentation.

	base_url($uri = '', $protocol = NULL)

**Parameters:**	

- $uri (string) – URI string
- $protocol (string) – Protocol, e.g. ‘http’ or ‘https’

**Returns:** Base URL

**Return type:** string

Returns your site base URL, as specified in your config file. Example:

	echo base_url();

This function returns the same thing as *site_url()*, without the index_page or *url_suffix* being appended.

Also like *site_url()*, you can supply segments as a string or an array. Here is a string example:

	echo base_url("blog/post/123");

The above example would return something like: http://example.com/blog/post/123

This is useful because unlike site_url(), you can supply a string to a file, such as an image or stylesheet. For example:

	echo base_url("images/icons/edit.png");

This would give you something like: http://example.com/images/icons/edit.png

This function is an alias for `CI_Config::base_url()`. For more info, please see the Config Library documentation.

	current_url()

**Returns:**	The current URL

**Return type:**	string

Returns the full URL (including segments) of the page being currently viewed.

*Note*

> Calling this function is the same as doing this: | | `site_url(uri_string())`;

	uri_string()

**Returns:**	An URI string

**Return type:**	string

Returns the URI segments of any page that contains this function. For example, if your URL was this:

	http://some-site.com/blog/comments/123
	
The function would return:

	blog/comments/123

This function is an alias for `CI_Config::uri_string()`. For more info, please see the Config Library documentation.

	index_page()

**Returns:**	‘index_page’ value

**Return type:**	mixed

Returns your site index_page, as specified in your config file. Example:

	echo index_page();

`anchor($uri = '', $title = '', $attributes = '')`

**Parameters:**
	
- $uri (string) – URI string
- $title (string) – Anchor title
- $attributes (mixed) – HTML attributes

**Returns:** HTML hyperlink (anchor tag)

**Return type:** string

Creates a standard HTML anchor link based on your local site URL.

The first parameter can contain any segments you wish appended to the URL. As with the *site_url()* function above, segments can be a string or an array.

Note

If you are building links that are internal to your application do not include the base URL `(http&#58;//...)`. This will be added automatically from the information specified in your config file. Include only the URI segments you wish appended to the URL.

The second segment is the text you would like the link to say. If you leave it blank, the URL will be used.

The third parameter can contain a list of attributes you would like added to the link. The attributes can be a simple string or an associative array.

Here are some examples:

	echo anchor('news/local/123', 'My News', 'title="News title"');

	// Prints: <a href="http://example.com/index.php/news/local/123" title="News title">My News</a>

	echo anchor('news/local/123', 'My News', array('title' => 'The best news!'));

	// Prints: <a href="http://example.com/index.php/news/local/123" title="The best news!">My News</a>

	echo anchor('', 'Click here');

	// Prints: <a href="http://example.com">Click Here</a>

`anchor_popup($uri = '', $title = '', $attributes = FALSE)`

**Parameters:**	

- $uri (string) – URI string
- $title (string) – Anchor title
- $attributes (mixed) – HTML attributes

**Returns:** Pop-up hyperlink

**Return type:** string

Nearly identical to the anchor() function except that it opens the URL in a new window. You can specify JavaScript window attributes in the third parameter to control how the window is opened. If the third parameter is not set it will simply open a new window with your own browser settings.

Here is an example with attributes:

	$atts = array(
	        'width'       => 800,
	        'height'      => 600,
	        'scrollbars'  => 'yes',
	        'status'      => 'yes',
	        'resizable'   => 'yes',
	        'screenx'     => 0,
	        'screeny'     => 0,
	        'window_name' => '_blank'
	);

	echo anchor_popup('news/local/123', 'Click Me!', $atts);

*Note*

> The above attributes are the function defaults so you only need to set the ones that are different from what you need. If you want the function to use all of its defaults simply pass an empty array in the third parameter: | | `echo anchor_popup(‘news/local/123’, ‘Click Me!’, array())`;

*Note*

> The window_name is not really an attribute, but an argument to the JavaScript window.open() <http://www.w3schools.com/jsref/met_win_open.asp> method, which accepts either a window name or a window target.

*Note*

> Any other attribute than the listed above will be parsed as an HTML attribute to the anchor tag.

`mailto($email, $title = '', $attributes = '')`

**Parameters:**	

- $email (string) – E-mail address
- $title (string) – Anchor title
- $attributes (mixed) – HTML attributes

**Returns:** A “mail to” hyperlink

**Return type:** string

Creates a standard HTML e-mail link. Usage example:

	echo mailto('me@my-site.com', 'Click Here to Contact Me');

As with the anchor() tab above, you can set attributes using the third parameter:

	$attributes = array('title' => 'Mail me');
	echo mailto('me@my-site.com', 'Contact Me', $attributes);

`safe_mailto($email, $title = '', $attributes = '')`

**Parameters:** 

- $email (*string*) – E-mail address
- $title (*string*) – Anchor title
- $attributes (*mixed*) – HTML attributes

**Returns:** A spam-safe “mail to” hyperlink

**Return type:** string

Identical to the mailto() function except it writes an obfuscated version of the mailto tag using ordinal numbers written with JavaScript to help prevent the e-mail address from being harvested by spam bots.

	auto_link($str, $type = 'both', $popup = FALSE)

**Parameters:**	

- $str (string) – Input string
- $type (string) – Link type (‘email’, ‘url’ or ‘both’)
- $popup (bool) – Whether to create popup links

**Returns:** Linkified string

**Return type:** string

Automatically turns URLs and e-mail addresses contained in a string into links. Example:

	$string = auto_link($string);

The second parameter determines whether URLs and e-mails are converted or just one or the other. Default behavior is both if the parameter is not specified. E-mail links are encoded as *safe_mailto()* as shown above.

Converts only URLs:

	$string = auto_link($string, 'url');

Converts only e-mail addresses:

	$string = auto_link($string, 'email');

The third parameter determines whether links are shown in a new window. The value can be TRUE or FALSE (boolean):

	$string = auto_link($string, 'both', TRUE);

`url_title($str, $separator = '-', $lowercase = FALSE)`

**Parameters:**	

- $str (string) – Input string
- $separator (string) – Word separator
- $lowercase (string) – Whether to transform the output string to lower-case

**Returns:** URL-formatted string

**Return type:** string

Takes a string as input and creates a human-friendly URL string. This is useful if, for example, you have a blog in which you’d like to use the title of your entries in the URL. Example:

	$title = "What's wrong with CSS?";
	$url_title = url_title($title);

	// Produces: Whats-wrong-with-CSS

The second parameter determines the word delimiter. By default dashes are used. Preferred options are: - (dash) or _ (underscore)

Example:

	$title = "What's wrong with CSS?";

	$url_title = url_title($title, 'underscore');

	// Produces: Whats_wrong_with_CSS

*Note*

> Old usage of ‘dash’ and ‘underscore’ as the second parameter is DEPRECATED.

The third parameter determines whether or not lowercase characters are forced. By default they are not. Options are boolean TRUE/FALSE.

Example:

	$title = "What's wrong with CSS?";

	$url_title = url_title($title, 'underscore', TRUE);

	// Produces: whats_wrong_with_css

`prep_url($str = '')`

**Parameters:**	$str (*string*) – URL string

**Returns:** Protocol-prefixed URL string

**Return type:** string

This function will add `http&#58;`// in the event that a protocol prefix is missing from a URL.

Pass the URL string to the function like this:

	$url = prep_url('example.com');

`redirect($uri = '', $method = 'auto', $code = NULL)`

**Parameters:**	

- $uri (*string*) – URI string
- $method (*string*) – Redirect method (‘auto’, ‘location’ or ‘refresh’)
- $code (*string*) – HTTP Response code (usually 302 or 303)

**Return type:** void

Does a “header redirect” to the URI specified. If you specify the full site URL that link will be built, but for local links simply providing the URI segments to the controller you want to direct to will create the link. The function will build the URL based on your config file values.

The optional second parameter allows you to force a particular redirection method. The available methods are auto, location and refresh, with location being faster but less reliable on IIS servers. The default is auto, which will attempt to intelligently choose the method based on the server environment.

The optional third parameter allows you to send a specific HTTP Response Code - this could be used for example to create 301 redirects for search engine purposes. The default Response Code is 302. The third parameter is only available with location redirects, and not refresh. Examples:

	if ($logged_in == FALSE)
	{
	        redirect('/login/form/');
	}

	// with 301 redirect

	redirect('/article/13', 'location', 301);

*Note*

> In order for this function to work it must be used before anything is outputted to the browser since it utilizes server headers.
 
*Note*

> For very fine grained control over headers, you should use the Output Library </libraries/output> set_header() method.

*Note*

> To IIS users: if you hide the Server HTTP header, the auto method won’t detect IIS, in that case it is advised you explicitly use the refresh method.

*Note*

> When the location method is used, an HTTP status code of 303 will automatically be selected when the page is currently accessed via POST and HTTP/1.1 is used.

*Important*

> This function will terminate script execution.